---
title: The Takeaway Issue 2
subtitle: October 2020 
 
date: "2020-10-31"
lastmod: "2020-10-31"

draft: false

featured: false

summary: In this issue of The Takeaway, we discuss carbon-13 neuroimaging and surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy

---
>*In this Issue:*
> - [*Imaging Real-Time Brain Metabolism*](#imaging-real-time-brain-metabolism)  
> - [*Surface Plasmon Resonance*](#surface-plasmon-resonance)


## **Imaging Real-Time Brain Metabolism**
### Alison Mark
#### Email: alison.mark@mail.utoronto.ca
#### DOI 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116202

The brain has one of the highest energy needs of any organ. Energy is primarily provided
by glucose, which is broken down into pyruvate, and then to lactate. Lactate is more than
just an energy substrate, it has also been implicated in neuroplasticity, memory
development, and signalling within the brain. Misuse or irregularities in lactate
metabolism have been associated with pathologies such as neurodegenerative disorders
or brain cancer, A recent paper from Dr. Casey Lee has produced a topographical map of
lactate throughout the brain using a novel carbon-13 (13C) MRI technique.  

By injecting subjects with hyperpolarized 13C-labelled pyruvate (the precursor to lactate
in metabolism) as a contrast agent, the conversion of pyruvate to lactate within the brain
could be observed. Dr Lee and her team discovered that there was a consistent pattern of
lactate:pyruvate ratio conserved across the brain regions of normal control subjects.
There are currently no equivalent methods to 13C-MRI for in vivo imaging of metabolism, and its 
use here has significance for clinical settings. By establishing a baseline for 13C-
lactate signal observable within the brain, disease states implicating lactate metabolism may
be more accurately discovered and monitored.


## **Surface Plasmon Resonance**
### Ajay David
#### Email: luke.david@sri.utoronto.ca

A ligand binding to its receptor is a fundamental biological process. However, a
major challenge in studying these molecular interactions is the lack of a precise
detection technique. By exploiting our understanding of light, the Surface
Plasmon Resonance (SPR) spectrometer captures these molecular events by
detecting changes in the refractive index when binding occurs. 

SPR uses a chip where the ligand of interest is immobilized and the analyte
(putative binding partner) is flowed over. This enables researchers to study
biomolecular interactions in real-time without the need to label to assess
binding. At SRI, members of Dr. Gariepy’s lab use SPR to determine the binding
kinetics of antibodies and aptamers - which are short oligonucleotides or
peptides that bind a specific target. Thus, by using SPR they investigate different
pharmacological agent’s specificity to known targets, while providing the
opportunity to uncover unknown interactions which yet remain to be
discovered.


*You can download a PDF of this issue [here!](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1lmazv9_-i_tyvSn6NHnT70vO1JMLViGU/view?usp=sharing)*  
*Want to get in touch or contribute? Contact sri.studentnetwork@gmail.com! We look forward to hearing from you.*
