---
title: The Takeaway Issue 5
subtitle: April 2021 
 
date: "2021-04-30"
lastmod: "2021-04-30"

draft: false

featured: false

summary: In this issue of The Takeaway, we discuss hippocampal volume mapping and covariance analysis of blood flow in youth with bipolar disorder

---
>*In this Issue:*
> - [*Novel Automated Tool Accelerates Contouring of Hippocampal Anatomy from MR Images*](#novel-automated-tool-accelerates-contouring-of-hippocampal-anatomy-from-mr-images)  
> - [*How Do Cerebral Blood Flow Patterns Compare to Brain Structure in Adolescent Bipolar Disorder?*](#how-do-cerebral-blood-flow-patterns-compare-to-brain-structure-in-adolescent-bipolar-disorder)


## **Novel Automated Tool Accelerates Contouring of Hippocampal Anatomy from MR Images**
### Moses Cook
#### Email: moses.cook@mail.utoronto.ca
#### DOI 10.1002/hbm.24811

Hippocampal volume is an imaging biomarker for dementia and other
neurodegenerative diseases. Accurate delineation (segmentation) of the
hippocampus from MR images is critical for determining volumetric and
morphometric (e.g., shape) measurements. However, segmentation of such
images can be time consuming, especially for high-resolution data with many 2D
slices that encompass a 3D brain scan. Furthermore, proper segmentation is
compounded by variability between observers and pathological hippocampi.  

HippMapp3r is an open-source software tool developed by Dr. Maged Goubran,
an assistant professor in the department of Medical Biophysics, in collaboration
with Dr. Sandra Black, which can automatically segment the hippocampus from
a 3D MRI scan of the brain (https://hippmapp3r.readthedocs.io). It employs a
state-of-the-art machine learning framework based on a 3D convolutional
neural network which “learned” to segment the hippocampus based on a dataset neural network 
which “learned” to segment the hippocampus based on a dataset of manually segmented images. 
The tool is robust to atrophied anatomy and presence of vascular lesions,
and outperformed other available segmentation tools in a recent publication (which was among the top
downloaded articles in Human Brain Mapping that year). Such machine learning techniques continue to be
developed in the Goubran lab and are being applied to study neurological disorders and map brain circuitry.


## **How Do Cerebral Blood Flow Patterns Compare to Brain Structure in Adolescent Bipolar Disorder?**
### Nadia Bragagnolo
#### Email: nadia.bragagnolo@sri.utoronto.ca
#### DOI 10.1177/0271678X21989246

Bipolar disorder (BD) has long been known as a neurological disease, but research from recent years has also
revealed cardiovascular implications. As such, studying blood flow in the brain may provide novel insight into
BD pathology. Nicholas Luciw is a Ph.D. candidate in Dr. Bradley MacIntosh’s lab at Sunnybrook, where they
utilize cerebral blood flow (CBF) data acquired with MRI to better understand BD. In a recent publication in
the Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism, Nicholas compared CBF to brain structure in groups of
adolescents with and without BD using covariance analysis, a method for observing patterns in datasets at
the group level. This work, done in collaboration with the Centre for Youth Bipolar Disorder, was the first
time that CBF covariance had been assessed in an adolescent cohort. He found that CBF patterns in both
disease and control groups cluster according to brain hemisphere, suggesting that CBF covariance patterns
are primarily driven by vascular physiology rather than anatomy or function. This work also showed that CBF
patterns aligned with structural patterns more closely in individuals with BD than in controls. In other words,
even at this early stage in BD development there are overlapping blood flow and structural features that are
not present in healthy individuals. This information will help illuminate future research into the timeline of
BD development. Congratulations to Nicholas on this great contribution!


*You can download a PDF of this issue [here!](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1eYaACQ0xK_WR7Ma4hqpizVXPKK7E6idf/view?usp=sharing)*  
*Want to get in touch or contribute? Contact sri.studentnetwork@gmail.com! We look forward to hearing from you.*
