---
title: The Takeaway - Issue 3
subtitle: January 2021 | Late Gadolinium Enhancement and Blood-Spinal Cord Barrier Opening with Focused Ultrasound
 
date: "2021-01-30"
lastmod: "2021-01-30"

draft: false

featured: false

summary: In this issue of The Takeaway, we discuss Late Gadolinium Enhancement and Blood-Spinal Cord Barrier Opening using FUS!

---

# Table of Contents
1. [Late Gadolinium Enhancement](#late-gadolinium-enhancement)
2. [Blood-Spinal Cord Barrier Opening Using FUS](#blood-spinal-cord-barrier-opening-using-fus)
3. [The Bigger Picture](#the-bigger-picture)
4. [Upcoming](#upcoming) 

# Late Gadolinium Enhancement

## Ajay David

### Email: luke.david@sri.utoronto.ca

### DOI 10.1002/mrm.24531

Late Gadolinium Enhancement (LGE) is a non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) technique used to locate myocardial infarction (MI or damage after a heart
attack) in vivo. It is clinically utilized to assess tissue viability. It works by using a
(liquid) gadolinium-based contrast agent injected into the subject prior to the MRI
scan. Interestingly, gadolinium is not taken up by healthy cardiomyocytes, therefore
when gadolinium infused blood passes through the heart and the coronary artery
system, it simply washes through the heart. However, if there is an MI, the gadolinium
will pool within the infarction due to osmotic pressures. The lab of Dr. Nilesh Ghugre
uses LGE to locate infarction on clinical and preclinical models of MI and other
cardiomyopathies. As the Ghugre lab is part of the cardiacMRI group, they use LGE as
a ground truth/clinical standard to identify infarction as they test novel and innovative
techniques to characterize myocardial tissue.


# Blood-Spinal Cord Barrier Opening Using FUS
## Nicole Cappelletto
### Email: nicole.cappelletto@sri.utoronto.ca
#### DOI:10.7150/thno.46821

The blood-brain barrier and blood-spinal cord barrier (BSCB) tightly regulate the exchange of molecules between
the blood and central nervous system (CNS). Although these barriers serve to protect the CNS, they present major
challenges in drug delivery to the brain and spinal cord. These barriers, however, can be transiently opened using
focused ultrasound (FUS) mediated microbubble cavitation. At Sunnybrook, the O’Reilly Lab has been developing
FUS pulse sequences and acoustic signal detection methods to help translate this technique to the clinic for spinal
cord related therapies.
Dr. Fletcher is a recent PhD graduate from the O’Reilly Lab. She has developed a novel FUS pulse sequence coined
“short burst phased key exposures” to be able to deliver FUS to the spinal cord. Dr. Fletcher’s recent publication in
Theranostics presents the first application of FUS mediated BSCB opening in a pre-clinical model closely resembling
the human spine. In this porcine model, Dr. Fletcher has shown BSCB opening is possible and safe as confirmed
with MRI, the extravasation of a dye and histological analysis. We congratulate Dr. Fletcher on her exceptional
achievements and wish her the best as she continues her studies as a postdoctoral fellow!


# The Bigger Picture

## Anti-Oppression in Health Care and Science
####  A learner led virtual Symposium

March 12, 5:00 - 7:30 PM

March 13, 10:00 AM - 12:30 PM


## Virtual Yoga

Tuesdays at 7:00 PM

Passcode: 342797

https://zoom.us/j/7374829458?pwd=Z085TXBQZGE2WW85R3JPVkVuMWtIZz09#success


# Upcoming

## Coffee Hour 

February 26th, 2021

## OGS (Domestic & International)

Visit graduate unit specific deadlines

https://www.sgs.utoronto.ca/awards/ontario-graduate-scholarship/#section_4 


What to get in touch or contribute? Contact sri.studentnetwork@gmail.com! We look forward to hearing from you.

