---
title: The Takeaway Issue 4
subtitle: February 2021 
 
date: "2021-02-28"
lastmod: "2021-02-28"

draft: false

featured: false

summary: In this issue of The Takeaway, we discuss hyperpolarized carbon-13 MRI and focused ultrasound

---
>*In this Issue:*
> - [*Hyperpolarized Carbon-13 MRI*](#hyperpolarized-carbon-13-mri)  
> - [*State of the Field: Focused Ultrasound*](#state-of-the-field-focused-ultrasound)


## **Hyperpolarized Carbon-13 MRI**
### Ajay David
#### Email: luke.david@sri.utoronto.ca
#### DOI 10.1101/2020.11.06.20227298

Altered metabolic states lie at the fore front of many human diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. 
Hyperpolarized Carbon-13 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (HP 13C MRI) is an emerging imaging modality that can be used to 
image cell metabolism in vivo. During a HP 13C MRI experiment, a HP 13C labeled molecular probe is intravenously 
injected and imaged to observe its uptake and transformation to downstream metabolites. The hyperpola- rization of 
the sample involves the use of a high magnetic field strength and incredibly low temperature to increase the initial 
magnetization of the sample prior to injection. Upon this basis, the Cunningham Lab uses HP 13C-pyruvate to 
investigate irregular cell metabolism in humans. The group studies the uptake of 13C-pyruvate and its transformation 
to 13C-lactate and 13C-bicarbonate in intracranial metastases, Alzheimer’s disease, cardiac metabolism and the healthy 
brain. The figure presents a 13C-lactate MRI of an intracranial metastasis, where the arrow indicates the location 
of the tumor lesion.


## **State of the Field: Focused Ultrasound**
### Nicole Cappelletto
#### Email: nicole.cappelletto@sri.utoronto.ca
#### DOI 10.1038/s41582-020-00418-z

The prevalence of neurological conditions involving the central nervous system, ranging from Alzheimer Disease to brain 
cancer, has increased steadily over the years. Although treatment options have lagged behind our understanding of such 
diseases, technical improvements have allowed for the therapeutic benefits of Focused Ultrasound (FUS) to be realized in 
the brain. Dr. Ying Meng is a resident physician and PhD student in the Lipsman Lab at Sunnybrook. In a recent review 
published in Nature Reviews Neurology, Dr. Meng provides a comprehensive analysis on the applications and clinical trials 
involving FUS for various clinical indications. Aforementioned technical advancements have led to the development of three 
therapeutic ultrasound devices: ExAblate Neuro, NaviFUS and CarThera SonoCloud. Since then, several clinical trials, 
including those developed by the Lipsman Lab, have been initiated globally. To date, thirty-one sites around the world are 
actively conducting FUS mediated thermoablation, blood brain barrier opening, and neuromodulation studies. Although further 
developments will require global collaboration and efforts, the future of therapeutic FUS is bright and promising.


*You can download a PDF of this issue [here!](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1PGnv9iMRy6umvyCpzHGKqMTzvpNtmrUQ/view?usp=sharing)*  
*Want to get in touch or contribute? Contact sri.studentnetwork@gmail.com! We look forward to hearing from you.*
