The Takeaway
March 2020
Issue 1

% ==========================================================

Title: RNAscope: A Form of RNA In Situ Hybridization
By Ajay David
Email: luke.david@sri.utoronto.ca

The visualization of RNA in a cell may give an idea of where a specific gene is being
expressed within said cell. RNAscope allows researchers to capture gene expression at
the single cell resolution within an intact tissue, using probes designed to bind to and
detect specific endogenous mRNA in a cell.
Originally introduced to this technique by the Aubert lab, the Schuurmans lab uses
RNAscope to look at gene expression in the neocortex, spinal cord and retina. Using
RNAscope, multiple mRNA transcripts can be examined. The image on the left displays a
combination of conventional immunostaining, which shows the localization of protein,
and RNAscope imaging of retinal cells.

% ==========================================================

Title: Cell Death Remains Complex
By Alison Mark
Email: alison.mark@sri.utronto.ca
DOI:10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.025

Malfunctioning cells present a serious risk to their surrounding tissues; as such,
cells which have experienced damage are removed from an organism through
apoptosis, a tightly controlled method of cell death. The decision of a cell to
attempt recovery or undergo apoptosis is controlled by a group of proteins known
as the Bcl-2 family. The structures and interactions of Bcl-2 family members is a
major focus of the Andrews Lab.
A recent publication by Drs. Justin Kale and Christian Bogner, a post-doc and
former post-doc, respectively, in the Andrews Lab, focuses on a novel mechanism of
regulation of the pro-life protein Bcl-XL. Previously, Bcl-XL was thought to interact
in a 1:1 ratio with pro-death proteins to prevent their effects; Dr. Kale’s findings
indicate that Bcl-2 family members regulate apoptosis through large, multimeric
complexes that permit allosteric activation of pro-death proteins. As a result, the
response of individual cells to certain stimuli is all-or-nothing rather than graded.
"This new model of apoptosis regulation by Bcl-XL could lead to new ways to
modulate cell death in human disease." says Dr. Kale.

% ==========================================================

The Bigger Picture

1. CANSSI Ontario Research Day
March 5, 2020
Please Hyperlink: https://canssiontario.utoronto.ca/?mec-events=research_day

2. U of T 3 Minute Thesis Competition
Registration Open
Preliminary Heats March 2-13
Please Hyperlink: https://www.sgs.utoronto.ca/resources-supports/cgpd/three-minute-thesis-3mt-at-u-of-t/

3. Translational Research Forum
April 6, 2020
Please Hyperlink: https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/BSSTZ79

4. Life Sciences Career Expo 2020
May 12-14, 2020
Please Hyperlink: https://lsce.ca/

% ==========================================================

Upcoming

1. SSN Coffee Hours
March 2
April 7

2. SSN Elections
May 4

3. SSN Spring Social
May 22

4. OGS
See Graduate Unit Deadline
Please Hyperlink: https://www.sgs.utoronto.ca/awards/ontario-graduate-scholarship/#section_4 

5. QEII-GSST
March 31

% ==========================================================

What to contribute? Contact sri.studentnetwork@gmail.com

----------------- END ---------------------o
